Page 1:
3. NOUNS
$e

There are various types of nouns in Klingon.

3.1. Simple nouns

Simple nouns, like simple nouns in English, are simple words;
for example, DoS target or QIH destruction.

3.2. Complex nouns

Complex nouns, on the other hand, are made up of more than
one part.

3.2.1. Compound nouns

Compound nouns consist of two or three nouns in a row,
much like English earthworm (earth plus worm) or password
(pass plus word). For example, jolpa’ transport room consists
of jol transport beam plus pa’ room.

3.2.2. Verb plus -wl’

A second type of complex noun consists of a verb followed by
a suffix meaning one who does or thing which does. The
English suffix -er (as in builder “one who builds” or toaster
“thing which toasts”) is a rough equivalent. In Klingon, the

19

Page 2:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

suffix is -wI’. It occurs, for example, in baHwI’ gunner, which
consists of the verb baH fire (a torpedo) plus -wI’ one who
does. Thus, baHwI’ is literally ‘one who fires [a torpedo].”
Similarly, So’wI’ cloaking device comes from the verb So’
cloak plus -wI’ thing which does. So’w!? is a “thing which
cloaks.”

A noun formed by adding -wI’ to a verb is a regular noun,
so it may be used along with another noun to form a
compound noun. For example, tIjwI’ghom boarding party
comes from tIjwI’ boarder plus ghom group, and tljwI’ comes
from tlj board plus -wI’.

3.2.3. Other complex nouns

There are a good many nouns in Klingon which are two or,
less frequently, three syllables long, but which are not
complex nouns of the types described above. These nouns
probably at one time were formed by combining simple
nouns, but one or all of the nouns forming the complex noun
are no longer in use, so it is not possible (without extensive
etymological research) to know what the individual pieces
mean.

For example, ’ejDo’ means starship. The syllable ’ej also
occurs in ’ejyo’ Starfleet. There are, however, no known
Klingon words ’ej, Do’, or yo’ that have anything to do with
Starfleet, starships, the Federation, or space vehicles of any
kind. It is quite likely that Do’ is an Old Klingon word for
space vessel (the modern Klingon word is Duj) that is used
nowhere except in the noun ’ejDo’. Of course, without
further study, that remains pure conjecture.

3.3. Suffixes

All nouns, whether simple or complex, may be followed by
one or more suffixes. If there are two or more suffixes, the
suffixes must occur in a specific order. Suffixes may be
classified on the basis of their relative order after the noun.
There are five types of suffixes (which, for convenience, will
be numbered 1 through 5). Suffixes of Type 1 come right after
the noun; suffixes of Type 2 come after those of Type 1;
suffixes of Type 5 come last. This may be illustrated as
follows:

20

Page 3:
NOUNS
NOUN-1-2-3-4-5

Of course, if no suffix of Type 1 is used but a suffix of Type 2 is
used, the Type 2 suffix comes right after the noun. If a suffix
of Type 5 is the only suffix used, it comes right after the noun.
Only when two or more suffixes are used does their order
become apparent.

There are at least two suffixes in each suffix type. Only one
suffix of each type may be used at a time. That is, a noun
cannot be followed by, for example, two or three Type 4
suffixes.

The members of each suffix type are as follows.

3.3.1. Type 1: Augmentative/diminutive
-’a’ augmentative
This suffix indicates that what the noun refers to is bigger,

more important, or more powerful than it would be without
the suffix.

SuS wind, breeze SuS’a’ strong wind
Qagh mistake Qagh’a’ major blunder
woQ power woQ’a’ ultimate power

-Hom diminutive

This is the opposite of the augmentative suffix. It indicates
that what the noun refers to is smaller, less important, or less
powerful than it would be without the suffix.

SuS wind, breeze SuSHom wisp of air
roj peace rojHom truce, temporary peace

3.3.2. Type 2: Number

As in English, a singular noun in Klingon has no specific suffix
indicating that it is singular: nuH weapon refers to a single
weapon of any type. Unlike English, however, the lack of a
specific suffix for plural does not always indicate that the noun
is singular. In Klingon, a noun without a plural suffix may still
refer to more than one entity. The plurality is indicated by a

21

Page 4:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

pronoun, whether a verb prefix (see section 4.1) or a full word

(section 5.1), or by context. For example, yaS officer may

refer to a single officer or to a group of officers, depending on

other words in the sentence or the context of the discussion.
Compare:

yaS vImojpu’ J became an officer.
yaS Dimojpu’ We became officers.

yaS jIH I am an officer.
yaS maH We are officers.

In the first pair of sentences, the only difference is the verb
prefix (here only partially described; see section 4.1): vI- J,
DI- we. In the second pair, the pronouns are different: jIH J,
maH we.

Under certain circumstances, the only way to know wheth-
er the noun refers to one or more than one entity is by
context. Thus, yaS mojpu’ can be translated either he/she
became an officer or they became officers. Those taking part in
any discussion in which this sentence is used would presum-
ably already know whom is being talked about, so they would
also know whether he or she or they is the correct meaning.

Fortunately for students of Klingon, it is never incorrect to
add a plural suffix to a noun referring to more than one entity,
even in those cases where it is unnecessary to do so. Accord-
ingly, both yaS maH and yaSpu’ maH are correct, both
meaning we are officers (-pu’ is a plural suffix). On the other
hand, a plural suffix cannot be added to a noun referring to
only one thing, even if pronouns are present in the sentence.
In Klingon, yaSpu’ jIH J am officers is as incorrect as its
English translation.

There are three different plural suffixes in Klingon.

-pu’ plural for beings capable of using language

This suffix can be used to indicate plurality for Klingons,
Terrans, Romulans, Vulcans, and so on, but not for lower
animals of any kind, plants, inanimate objects, electromag-
netic or other beams or waves, etc.

22

Page 5:
NOUNS

yaS officer yaSpu’ officers
Duy emissary Duypw’ emissaries

-Du’ plural for body parts

This suffix is used when referring to body parts of those
beings capable of using language as well as of any other
animal.

qam foot qamDu’ feet
tihon nostril tlhonDu’ nostrils

-mey plural, general usage
This suffix is used to mark the plural of any noun.

mID colony mIDmey colonies
yuQ planet yuQmey planets

It can also be used with nouns referring to beings capable of
using language (those nouns which take -pu’). When it is so
used, it adds a notion of ‘“‘scattered all about” to the meaning.
Compare:

puq child
puqpu’ children
puqmey children all over the place

The suffix -mey cannot be used with body parts. It should
be noted, however, that Klingon poets often violate this
grammatical rule in order to evoke particular moods in their
poetry. Thus, forms such as tlhonmey nostrils scattered all
about do occur. Until the subtle nuances of such constructions
are firmly grasped, however, it is suggested that students of
Klingon stick to the rules.

Finally, some nouns in Klingon are inherently or always
plural in meaning, and therefore never take plural suffixes.

ray’ targets
23

Page 6:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

cha torpedoes
chuyDaH thrusters

The singular counterparts of such words are utterly dis-
tinct:

DoS target
peng torpedo
vIj_ thruster

The singular forms may take the -mey suffix, but the
meaning always carries the ‘‘scattered all about” connotation:

DoSmey targets scattered all about
pengmey torpedoes all over the place

Inherently plural nouns are treated grammatically as singu-
lar nouns in that singular pronouns are used to refer to them
(sections 4.1, 5.1). For example, in the sentence cha yIghuS
Stand by torpedoes! or Get the torpedoes ready to be fired! the
verb prefix yI-, an imperative prefix used for singular objects,
must be used even though the object (cha torpedoes) has a
plural meaning.

3.3.3. Type 3: Qualification

Suffixes of this type indicate the speaker’s attitude toward the
noun, or how sure the speaker is that the noun is being used
appropriately.

-qoq so-called

This suffix indicates that the noun is being used in a false or
ironic fashion. Saying rojqoq so-called peace, rather than
simply roj peace, indicates that the speaker does not really
believe that peace is legitimate or likely to endure.

-Hey apparent

This suffix indicates that the speaker is pretty sure the
object referred to by the noun is accurately described by the
noun, but has some doubts. For example, if the scanner on a
Klingon ship senses an object, and the officer reporting the
presence of this object assumes, but is not yet sure, that the
object is a vessel, he will probably refer to the object as
DujHey an apparent vessel, rather than simply Duj vessel.

24

Page 7:
NOUNS
-na’ definite

This is the counterpart of -Hey. It indicates that there is no
doubt in the speaker’s mind as to the accuracy of his or her
choice of words. Once the Klingon officer referred to above is
sure that the object the scanner has found is a vessel, he might
report the presence of Dujna’ a definite vessel, undoubtedly a
vessel.

3.3.4. Type 4: Possession/specification

Type 4 is the largest class of noun suffixes. It consists of all the
possessive suffixes, plus suffixes which can be translated as
English this and that.

The possessive suffixes are:

-wlj my -maj our
-lj your -raj your (plural)
-Daj his, her, its -chaj their

Thus, juH home occurs in juHwIj my home, juHllj your
home, juHchaj their home, etc.

When the noun being possessed refers to a being capable of
using language, a special set of suffixes is used for first- and
second-person possessors:

-wl’ my -ma’ our
-I’ your -ra’ your (plural)

These suffixes occur in, for example, joHwI’ my lord and
puqlI’ your child. It is grammatically correct to use the
regular possessive suffixes with nouns referring to beings
capable of speech (as in puqlIj your child), but such con-
structions are considered derogatory; joHwlj for my lord
borders on the taboo. Students of Klingon should bear this
in mind.

To indicate that one noun is the possessor of another noun
(e.g., enemy’s weapon), no suffix is used. Instead, the two
nouns are said in the order possessor—possessed: jagh nuH
enemy’s weapon (literally, enemy weapon). This construction
is also used for phrases translated by of the in English, such as
weapon of the enemy. (See also section 3.4.)

25

Page 8:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

There are two suffixes indicating how close to the speaker
the object referred to by the noun is.

-vam this

Like its English translation, this suffix indicates that the
noun refers to an object which is nearby or which is the topic
of the conversation.

nuHvam this weapon (near me as I speak)
yuQvam this planet (that we’ve been talking about)

When used with a plural noun (one with a plural suffix or an
inherently plural noun), -vam is translated these:

nuHmeyvam these weapons
-vetlh that

This suffix indicates that the noun refers to an object which
is not nearby or which is being brought up again as the topic
of conversation.

nuHvetlh that weapon (over there)
yuQvetlh that planet (as opposed to the one we were just
talking about)

When used with a plural noun, -vetlh is translated those:

nuHmeyvetlh those weapons

There is no Klingon equivalent for English a, an, the. In
translating from Klingon to English, one must use context as
a guide to when to use a or an and when the. In this book, a or
an and the are used in translations to make the English sound
more natural.

3.3.5. Type 5: Syntactic markers

These suffixes indicate something about the function of the
noun in the sentence. As in English, subjects and objects are
normally indicated by the position of the noun or nouns in
the sentence. The following two English sentences have the
same words, but the sentences have different meanings due to
the order of the words:

Dogs chase cats.
Cats chase dogs.

26

Page 9:
NOUNS

Subjects and objects in Klingon are likewise indicated by
word order. This is described in section 6.1.

In other instances, English indicates the function of nouns
in a sentence by adding words, particularly prepositions. In
the following English sentence, the word around before
canaries indicates that the canaries are neither chasing nor
being chased:

Dogs chase cats around canaries.

Similarly, in Klingon, nouns which indicate something
other than subject or object usually must have some special
indication of exactly what their function is. Unlike English,
this is accomplished by using suffixes.

-Daq locative

This suffix indicates that something is happening (or has
happened or will happen) in the vicinity of the noun to which
it is attached. It is normally translated by an English preposi-
tion: to, in, at, on. The exact translation is determined by the
meaning of the whole sentence. For example, pa’Daq is pa’
room plus the suffix -Daq. It may occur in sentences such as
the following:

pa’Daq jIHtaH I’m in the room.
pa’Daq yljaH Go to the room!

In the first sentence, jIH J is used in the sense of J am (see
section 6.3), so in is the most reasonable translation of -Daq.
In the second sentence, the verb is jaH go, so to makes the
most sense as a translation of -Daq. An English preposition
need not be part of the translation. Klingon Dung means area
above, and DungDagq is overhead, literally something like ‘at
the area above.”’ For further discussion on prepositional
concepts, see section 3.4.

It is worth noting at this point that the concepts expressed
by the English adverbs here, there, and everywhere are
expressed by nouns in Klingon: naDev hereabouts, pa’ there-
abouts, Dat everywhere. These words may perhaps be trans-
lated more literally as “‘area around here,” ‘‘area over there,”
and “‘all places,” respectively. Unlike other nouns, these
three words are never followed by the locative suffix. (Note

27

Page 10:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

that pa’ thereabouts and pa’ room are identical in sound;
pa’Daq, however, can mean only in/to the room.)

There are a few verbs whose meanings include locative
notions, such as ghoS approach, proceed. The locative suffix
need not be used on nouns which are the objects of such
verbs.

Duj ghoStaH It is approaching the ship.
(Duj ship, vessel, ghoStaH it is
approaching it)
yuQ wighoStaH We are proceeding toward the planet.
(yuQ planet, wighoStaH we are
Proceeding toward it)

If the locative suffix is used with such verbs, the resulting
sentence is somewhat redundant, but not out-and-out wrong.

DujDaq ghoStaH It is approaching toward the ship.

-vo’ from

This suffix is similar to -Daq but is used only when action is
in a direction away from the noun suffixed with -vo’.

pa’vo’ yIjaH Leave the room!

A more literal translation of this sentence might be ‘“Go from
the room.”

-mo’ due to, because of
This suffix occurs in sentences such as:
SuSmo’ joqtaH It is fluttering in the breeze.

The noun SuSmo’ means due to the breeze, so the whole
sentence is literally “‘due to the breeze, it [a flag] is flutter-
ing.”

-vaD for, intended for

This suffix indicates that the noun to which it is attached is
in some way the beneficiary of the action, the person or thing
for whom or for which the activity occurs.

Qu’vaD IP De’vam This information is useful for
the mission.

28

Page 11:
NOUNS

The noun Qu’vaD means for the mission, and in this sentence
-vaD indicates that the information is intended to be used
somehow for the mission under discussion.

~’e’ topic

This suffix emphasizes that the noun to which it is attached
is the topic of the sentence. In English, this is frequently
accomplished by stressing the noun (saying it emphatically) or
by special syntactic constructions.

lujpu’ jIH’e’ J, and only I, have failed.
It is I who has failed.
De’’e’ vitlhapnISpu’ J needed to get the INFORMATION.
It was the information (and not
something else) that I needed.

Without the ’e’, these same sentences would have no noun
singled out for emphasis:

lujpu’ jIH J have failed.
De’ vitlhapnISpu’ J needed to get the information.

For a further use of -’e’, see section 6.3.

3.3.6. Relative ordering of the suffixes

As briefly illustrated in the discussion of -vam this and -vetlh
that (section 3.3.4), when a noun is followed by more than
one suffix, the suffixes must occur in the proper order,
according to the classification just described. It is rare for a
noun to be followed by five suffixes, but it does happen from
time to time. Some examples of nouns with two or more
suffixes follow. (Suffix types are indicated by numbers.)

QaghHommeyHeylljmo’ due to your apparent minor errors

Qagh (noun) error
-Hom (1) diminutive
-mey (2) plural
-Hey (3) apparent
-llj (4) your

-mo’ (5) due to

pa’wljDaq in my quarters
pa’ (noun) room

29

Page 12:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

-wij (4) my
-Daq (5) locative
Duypu’qoqchaj their so-called emissaries
Duy (noun) emissary
-pu’ (2) plural
-qoq (3) so-called
-chaj (4) their
qamDu’wljDaq at my feet
gam (noun) foot
-Du’ (2) plural
“wij (4) my
-Daq (5) locative
rojHom’e’ the truce (as topic)
roj (noun) peace
-Hom (1) diminutive
“e’ (5) topic

All examples of suffixes given so far show only simple
nouns. Suffixes are attached to complex nouns (section 3.2) in
exactly the same fashion.

DIvI’may’DujmeyDaq at/to the Federation battle cruisers

DIvI’may’Duj (noun) Federation battle cruiser
-mey (2) plural
-Daq (5) locative
baHwI’pu’vam these gunners
baHwI’ (noun) gunner
-pu’ (2) plural
-vam (4) this

3.4. The noun—noun construction

Some combinations of two (or more) nouns in a row are so
common as to have become everyday words. These are the
compound nouns (as discussed in section 3.2.1). In addition,
it is possible to combine nouns in the manner of a compound
noun to produce a new construct even if it is not a legitimate
compound noun (‘“‘legitimate” in the sense that it would be
found in a dictionary).

The translation of two nouns combined in this way, say

30

Page 13:
NOUNS

N1-N2 (that is, noun #1 followed by noun #2), would be N2
of the N1. For example, nuH weapon and pegh secret combine
to form nuH pegh secret of the weapon. An alternate transla-
tion would be NI’s N2, in this case, the weapon’s secret. As
discussed in section 3.3.4, this is the Klingon possessive
construction for a noun possessed by another noun.

When the noun-noun construction is used, only the second
noun can take syntactic suffixes (Type 5). Both nouns,
however, may take suffixes of the other four types. For
example:

nuHvam pegh secret of this weapon

nuH (noun) weapon
-vam (4) this
pegh (noun) Secret
jaghpu’ yoQmeyDaq at/to the enemies’ planets
jagh (noun) enemy
-pu’ (2) plural
yuQ (noun) planet
-mey (2) plural
-Daq (5) locative
puqwl’ qamDuw’ my child’s feet
puq (noun) child
-wl’ (4) my
qam (noun) foot
-Du (2) plural

English prepositional phrases are also rendered in Klingon
by this noun—noun construction. Prepositional concepts such
as above and below are actually nouns in Klingon, best
translated as ‘‘area above,” ‘‘area below,” etc. The locative
suffix (section 3.3.5) follows the second noun. For example:

nagh DungDaq above the rock

nagh (noun) rock
Dung (noun) area above
-Daq (5) locative

More literally, this is “‘at the area above the rock” or ‘‘at the
rock’s above-area.””

31

Page 14:
4. VERBS
$$$ ea

Klingon verbs are mostly monosyllabic forms which may
be accompanied by several affixes. As with Klingon
nouns, Klingon verbs may take suffixes falling into a number
of types based on their relative position following the verb.
There are nine types of verb suffixes. Unlike Klingon
nouns, Klingon verbs may take prefixes. Thus, if suffix types
are indicated as numbers, the structure of a Klingon verb
is:
PREFIX-VERB-1-—2-3-4—5-6-7-8-9

4.1. Pronominal prefixes

Each Klingon verb begins with a single prefix that indicates
who or what is performing the action described by the verb
and, when relevant, who or what is the recipient of that
action. In other words, Klingon verb prefixes indicate both
the subject and the object of the sentence.

4.1.1. Basic prefixes

The basic set of prefixes can be presented in a chart. (In order
to make the chart as clear as possible, some prefixes are
repeated.)

Note that both the subject and the object are combined

32

Page 15:
VERBS

OBJECT none me you him/ us you them
herlit (plural)
SUBJECT
I jl- - qa vi- - Sa- vI-
you bI- cho- - Da-— ju- - Da-
hel/shelit 0 mu Du 0 nu- II- 0
we ma- -  pl-_ wi- - re- DI-
you (plural) Su- tu- -  bo- che- - bo-
they 0 mu- ni- lu nu II- 0

into a single prefix. 0 in the chart means that the particular
subject-object combinations are indicated by the absence of a
prefix before the verb; — in the chart notes subject-object
combinations which cannot be expressed with the Klingon
verb prefix system. For such meanings, suffixes (section 4.2.1)
and/or pronouns (section 5.1) must be used.

The prefixes in the first column of the chart (headed
“none’’) are used when there is no object; that is, when the
action of the verb affects only the subject (the ‘doer”). The
verb Qong sleep occurs with the pronominal prefixes as
follows:

jIQong J sleep

bIQong you sleep

Qong he/she/it sleeps, they sleep
maQong we sleep

SuQong you (plural) sleep

In the case of Qong he/she/it sleeps, they sleep, the exact
subject would be indicated elsewhere in the sentence or by
context.

This set of prefixes is also used when an object is possible,
but unknown or vague. Thus, jlyaj J understand can be used

33

Page 16:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

when the speaker understands things in general, knows what
is going on, or understands what another speaker has just
said. It cannot, however, be used for understanding a lan-
guage or understanding a person. Similarly, maSop we eat can
be used to indicate a general act of eating, but not if a specific
food is mentioned.

The remaining prefixes combine subject and object. Some
of them are illustrated below, using the verb legh see.

qalegh I see you cholegh you see me
vilegh I see him/herlit/ mulegh he/she/it sees me,
them they see me

Salegh I see you (plural) tulegh you (plural) see me

Dalegh you see him/her/ Dulegh he/she/it sees you

itthem
julegh you see us pllegh we see you
legh he/shel/it sees lulegh they see him/herlit
himlherlit/them,

they see them

4.1.2 Imperative prefixes

A special set of prefixes is used for imperatives, that is, verbs
giving commands. Commands can be given only to you or you
(plural).

OBJECT none me him|herlit us them
you yl- HI- yl- gho- tI-
you (plural) pe- HI- yl- gho- tl-

Note that, with one exception, the identical prefix is used
regardless of whether the command is being given to one or
more than one person. The single exception is when a
command is given but there is no object. In such cases, a
special prefix pe- is used to give a command to several people.
Examples of the imperative prefixes follow. Exclamation
points in the translation indicate that it is a command.

ylQong sleep! peQong (you plural) sleep!
HIqIp hit me! ghoqIp hit us!
34

Page 17:
VERBS
yIqIp hit him/herlit! tIqIp hit them!

To indicate action directed against oneself in an imperative
verb (e.g., tell yourself), the suffix -egh oneself is used along
with ylI- or pe- (see section 4.2.1).

4.1.3 Notational conventions

As a notational convention, prefixes indicating subject and
object will be translated as subject—object; e.g., qa- I-you,
DI- we-them. Imperative prefixes will be translated similarly,
preceded by the word imperative: tl- imperative: you—them.

Also, prefixes which can refer to male, female, inanimate,
singular, and/or plural (e.g., vI- J—-him/her/it/them) will be
translated correctly, but usually without giving all the options
(e.g., I-him/her). This convention will also be used when
translating verbs containing these prefixes; e.g., vllegh J see
him/her.

4.2. Verb suffixes

There are nine types of verb suffixes.

4.2.1. Type 1: Oneself/one another
-egh oneself

This suffix is used to indicate that the action described by
the verb affects the performer of the action, the subject. It is
translated by English self. When this suffix is used, the prefix
set indicating ‘‘no object” must also be used.

jlqIp’egh I hit myself (qIp hit)
bIqIp’egh you hit yourself
qIp’egh he/she hits himself/herself

It is also possible to use this suffix with imperative verbs.
As with nonimperatives, the prefix indicating “no object”
must be used.

ylja’’egh tell yourself! (ja’ tell)
peja’’egh tell yourselves!

35

Page 18:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

-chuq one another

This suffix is used only with plural subjects. It is translated
each other or one another. The prefix set indicating ‘‘no
object” is also used when this suffix is used.

maqIpchuq we hit each other (qIp hit)
SuqIpchuq you (plural) hit each other
qIpchuq they hit each other
peqIpchuq hit each other!

4.2.2. Type 2: Volition/predisposition

Suffixes of this type express how much choice the subject has
about the action described or how predisposed the subject is
to doing it.

-nIS need

vileghnIS [ need to see him/her (legh see)
bISopnIS you need to eat (Sop eat)

-qang willing

Heghqang he/she is willing to die (Hegh die)
qaja’qang I am willing to tell you (ja’ tell)

-rup ready, prepared (referring to beings)

Heghrup he/she is ready to die (Hegh die)
qaleghrup I am ready to see you (legh see)
nuja’rup they are prepared to tell us (ja’ tell)

-beH ready, set up (referring to devices)

pojbeH (the device) is set up to analyze it (poj analyze)
labbeH (the device) is ready to transmit data (lab
transmit data)

There is, it should be noted, a verb ghuS which means to be
prepared to launch or project (something). This verb never
takes the suffix -rup. It is used primarily in reference to
torpedoes—so much so that if the object is not specifically

36

Page 19:
VERBS

stated, and context does not dictate otherwise, it is always
assumed to be torpedoes. Accordingly, both of the following
sentences mean Be prepared to launch torpedoes! or Stand by
on torpedoes!

cha yIghuS (cha torpedoes)
ylIghuS
The verb ghuS can also be used in reference to, among

other things, rockets, missiles, and various kinds of energy
beams (which, like torpedoes, go from one point to another).
It is also used to describe the action of pulling back the elastic
band of a slingshot. In most other instances of preparedness,
however, -rup is required.

-vIp afraid
choHoHvIp you are afraid to kill me (HoH kill)
nuqIpvIp they are afraid to hit us (qIp hit)

This suffix is rarely used with a prefix meaning J or we.
Though it is grammatically correct, it is culturally taboo.

4.2.3. Type 3: Change

Suffixes of this type indicate that the action described by the
verb involves a change of some kind from the state of affairs
that existed before the action took place.

-choH change in state, change in direction

maDo’choH we are becoming lucky, we are undergoing
a turn of luck (Do’ be lucky)
ghoSchoH he/she is beginning to go (somewhere)
(ghoS go)

The implication of the second example is that he or she was
going either nowhere or somewhere else sometime before the
phrase was uttered. Note that the translation of this suffix
may be English become or begin to.

-qa’ resume

Using this suffix implies that an action had been taking
place, then it stopped, and then it began again.

vInejqa’ I am resuming the search, I am searching for
37

Page 20:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

him/her again (nej search)

4.2.4. Type 4: Cause
-moH cause

Adding this suffix to a verb indicates that the subject is
causing a change of condition or causing a new condition to
come into existence.

tljwI’ghom vIchenmoH I form a boarding party
(tIjwI’ghom boarding party,
chen take form, take shape)

This sentence might also be translated I cause a boarding
party to be formed.

HIQoymoH let me hear (something) (Qoy hear)

More revealingly, this sentence could be translated cause me
to hear (something). Note that this sentence would not be
used in asking permission to hear; it is a direct command.

Normally, the best English translation of a verb with -moH
does not contain the word cause. For example, chenmoH
he/she makes, creates could be translated he/she causes to take
shape (chen take form, take shape), but this is an awkward
English phrase.

4.2.5. Type 5: Indefinite subject/ability

The two suffixes of Type 5 have nothing much to do with each
other except for both being Type 5. As a result, no verb
occurs with both of these suffixes at the same time.

-lu’ indefinite subject

This suffix is used to indicate that the subject is unknown,
indefinite, and/or general. Since the subject is always the
same (that is, it is always unstated), the pronominal prefixes
(section 4.1.1) are used in a different way. Those prefixes
which normally indicate first- or second-person subject and

38

Page 21:
VERBS

third-person singular object (vI-, Da-, wI-, bo-) are used to
indicate first- or second-person object. Thus, vI-, which
normally means I do something to him/her, when in a verb
with lw’? means someone/something does something to me.
Similarly, the prefix lu-, which normally means they do
something to him/her, becomes someone/something does
something to them.

Dagawlu’ someone/something remembers you
(qaw remember)

wlleghlu’ someone/something sees us (legh see)

Soplu’ someone/something eats it (Sop eat)

Verbs with -lu’ are often translated into the English passive
voice.

Dagqawlu’ you are remembered
wileghlu’ we are seen
Soplu’ it is eaten

When used with the verb tu’ find, observe and a third-
person singular subject pronoun (0), the resulting verb form
tu’lu’ someone/something finds it is often translated by En-
glish there is.

naDev puqpu’ tu’lu’ there are children around here,
someonelsomething finds children
here (naDev hereabouts, puqpu’
children)

-laH_ can, able

jIQonglaH J can sleep (Qong sleep)
choleghlaH you can see me (legh see)
nuQaw’laH he/she can destroy us (Qaw’ destroy)

4.2.6. Type 6: Qualification

Like Type 3 noun suffixes, these suffixes show how sure the
speaker is about what is being said.

39

Page 22:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY
-chu’ -clearly, perfectly

jlyajchw’ I understand clearly (yaj understand)
baHchw’ he/she fired (the torpedo) perfectly (baH fire [a
torpedo))

-bej certainly, undoubtedly

chImbej it is undoubtedly empty (chIm be empty)
nuSeHbej he/she is certainly controlling us(SeH con-
trol)

-law’ seemingly, apparently

chImlaw’ it appears to be empty (chIm be empty)
nuSeHlaw’ he/she seems to be controlling us (SeH con-
trol)

This suffix expresses any uncertainty on the speaker’s part
and may even be thought of as meaning I think or I suspect.
Thus, the previous two sentences could be translated I think
it’s empty, I suspect that he/she is controlling us.

4.2.7. Type 7: Aspect

Klingon does not express tenses (past, present, future). These
ideas come across from context or other words in the sentence
(such as wa’leS tomorrow). The language does, however,
indicate aspect: whether an action is completed or not yet
completed, and whether an action is a single event or a
continuing one.

The absence of a Type 7 suffix usually means that the action
is not completed and is not continuous (that is, it is not one of
the things indicated by the Type 7 suffixes). Verbs with no
Type 7 suffix are translated by the English simple present
tense.

Dalegh you see him/her (legh see)
qaja’ I tell you (ja’ tell)

When the context is appropriate, verbs without a Type 7
suffix may be translated by the English future tense (will), but
the real feeling of the Klingon is closer to English sentences
such as We fly tomorrow at dawn, where the present-tense
verb refers to an event in the future.

40

Page 23:
VERBS
-pu’ perfective

This suffix indicates that an action is completed. It is often
translated by the English present perfect (have done some-
thing).

Daleghpu’ you have seen it (legh see)
vIneHpu’ I wanted them (neH want)
qaja’pu’ I told you (ja’ tell)

-ta’ accomplished, done

This suffix is similar to -pu’, but it is used when an activity
was deliberately undertaken, the implication being that some-
one set out to do something and in fact did it. English
translations seldom reveal the distinction.

vISuqta’ I have acquired it (Suq get, acquire)
luHoHta’ they have killed him/her (HoH kill)

The second sentence above could not be used if the killing
were the result of a general attack not intended to kill a
specific person or if the killing were an accident. In such
cases, -pu’ would be used:

luHoHpw’ they have killed him/her

The meaning of -ta’ can also be indicated syntactically.
That is, instead of using the suffix -ta’, a special verbal
construction can follow the verb which indicates the accom-
plished action. This special verb is rIn be finished, accom-
plished, and in this usage it always takes the suffix -taH
continuous (see below) and the third-person pronominal
prefix (0). The resulting construction, rIntaH, literally means
it continues to be finished or it remains accomplished. It is
used to indicate that the action denoted by the preceding verb
is a fait accompli: it is done, and it cannot be undone.

luHoH rIntaH they have killed him/her (HoH kill)
vije’ rIntaH I have purchased it (je’ purchase)
The English translations of rIntaH and -ta’ are usually the
same. The notion of absolute finality implied by rIntaH
seldom comes across.
It should be noted that rIntaH is sometimes used for

41

Page 24:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

dramatic effect, even in cases when the action could be
undone.

-taH continuous
This suffix indicates that an action is ongoing.

nughoStaH it is approaching us (ghoS approach)
ylIghoStaH steady on course!, maintain this course!
(ghoS go, approach, proceed on a course)

Both of the above sentences suggest a continuing activity.
The meaning of -taH can be seen clearly by comparing the
following two commands:

yljun execute an evasive maneuver!
yljuntaH take evasive action!

In the first case, the maneuver is to be executed once only. In
the second, a series of evasive maneuvers is to be executed
—the action is to be continuous.

-I’ in progress

This suffix is similar to -taH continuous in that it indicates
that an activity is ongoing. Unlike -taH, however, -II’ implies
that the activity has a known goal or a definite stopping point.
In other words, it suggests that progress is being made toward
that goal.

cholll’ it is getting closer
(chol get close, come near)

This word would be used for, i.e., a missile approaching a
target, when it is known that the missile has been aimed at
that target. If a missile is getting closer, but its intended
destination is not known, choltaH (with -taH continuous)
would be more appropriate.

vill’ I am transmitting (the data)
(I? transmit data to a place)

This word implies that data are in the process of being
transmitted, but that there is a finite amount of data, so there
will be a definite end to the transmission. The fact that the
verb I’ and the suffix -II’ are identical in sound is purely
coincidental, so far as can be determined.

42

Page 25:
VERBS

The suffix -taH continuous can be used whether there is a
known goal or not. -II’, on the other hand, can be used only
when there is an implied goal. It is possible to consider -II’ a
continuous counterpart of -ta’, and -taH a continuous coun-
terpart of -pu’.

4.2.8. Type 8: Honorific

-neS honorific

There is but one suffix in this category. It is used to express
extreme politeness or deference. It is used only in addressing
a superior, someone of higher rank in the Klingon social,
political, or military hierarchy. It is never required.

qaleghneS I am honored to see you (legh see)
HIja’neS do me the honor of telling me (ja’ tell)

This suffix is used rather infrequently by Klingons.

4.2.9. Type 9: Syntactic markers

Similar to Type 5 noun suffixes (section 3.3.5), these verb
suffixes have to do with the verb’s role in the sentence. The
first six suffixes will be noted briefly here, but illustrated more
completely in section 6.2.

-DI’ as soon as, when

DaSeHDI’ as soon as you control it (SeH control)
qara’DI’ as soon as I command you (ra’ command)

-chugh if

DaneHchugh if you want them (neH want)
choja’chugh if you tell me (ja’ tell)

-pa’ before

choja’pa’ before you tell me (ja’ tell)
qara’pa’ before I command you (ra’ command)

-vIS while
This suffix is always used along with the Type 7 suffix

-taH continuous.
43

Page 26:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY
SutihtaHvIS while they are negotiating (Sutlh negotiate)
bIQongtaHvIS while you are sleeping (Qong sleep)
-bogh which

This is the relative-clause marker. It is described in section
6.2.3.

-meH for
This marks purpose clauses. See section 6.2.4.
~’a’ interrogative

This suffix indicates that the sentence is a yes/no question;
that is, a question which can be answered “‘yes” or “‘no.” (See
also section 6.4.).

cholegh’a’ do you see me? (legh see)
yaj’a’ does he/she understand? (yaj understand )

Questions of other types require special question words
(section 6.4).

-wI’ one who does, thing which does

This is the suffix described earlier (section 3.2.2) which
turns verbs into nouns.

So’wI’ cloaking device (So’ cloak, hide)
baHwI’ gunner (baH fire [a torpedo})
joqwI’ flag (joq flutter, wave)

4.2.10. Relative ordering of the suffixes

As with nouns, when more than one suffix is used with a verb,
they must occur in the correct order, according to their type.
No more than one suffix of each type may occur at a time. No
instances have been found of a verb followed by nine suffixes,
but it is theoretically possible. A few examples should suffice
to show ordering of the suffixes.

nuHotlhpu’’a’ have they scanned us?
nu- (prefix) they—us
Hotlh (verb) scan

44

Page 27:
VERBS
-pu’ 0 perfective
~a’ (9) interrogative

Qawvreghpu’ he/she destroyed himselflherself
(prefix) he/she

Oaw’ (verb) destroy

“egh (1) oneself

-pu’ (7) perfective

wichenmoHlaH we can create it

wI- (prefix) we-it

chen (verb) take form

-moH (4) cause

-laH (5) can, able
Daqawlu’taH you are to be remembered
Da- (prefix) you—him/her
qaw (verb) remember
-lw’ (5) indefinite subject
-taH (7) continuous
vitlhapnISpu’ J needed to take him/her

vI- (prefix) I-himlher

tlhap (verb) take

-nIS (2) need

-pu’ (7) perfective

HeghqangmoHlu’ pu’ it made him/her willing to die
0 (prefix) he/she—-himlher

Hegh (verb) die
-qang (2) willing
-moH (4) cause
-lw’ (5) indefinite subject
-pu’ (7) perfective
maghoSchoHmoHneS’a’ may we execute a course (to some
place)?
ma- (prefix) we
ghoS (verb) proceed on a course
-choH (3) change
-moH (4) cause
-neS (8) honorific
~’a’ (9) interrogative

Page 28:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY
4.3. Rovers

There is one additional set of verb suffixes which Klingon
grammarians call lengwI’mey rovers (from leng travel, roam,
rove, -wl’ thing which does, -mey plural). Rovers are verb
suffixes which do not have a fixed position in relation to the
other suffixes following a verb but, instead, can come just
about anywhere except following a Type 9 suffix. Their
position is determined by the meaning intended. There are
two types of rovers: the negative and the emphatic.

-be’ not’
This is the general suffix of negation, translated as English
not. It follows the concept being negated.
vilo’laHbe’ they are useless to me, I cannot use them

vI- (prefix) I-them
lo’ (verb) use

-laH (5) can, able
-be’ (rover) not

jlSaHbe’ J don’t care (which of several courses of
action is followed)

jl- (prefix) I
SaH (verb) care, be concerned about
-be’ (rover) not
qay’be’ it’s not a problem, no problem (exclamation)
(prefix) it
qay’ (verb) be a problem, be a hassle
-be’ (rover) not

The roving nature of -be’ is best illustrated in the following
set of words.

choHoHvIp you are afraid to kill me
choHoHvIpbe’ you are not afraid to kill me
choHoHbe’vIp you are afraid to not kill me

cho- (prefix) you-me
HoH (verb) kill

-vIp (2) afraid
-be’ (rover) not

In the second word, the negated notion is afraid (that is, not
afraid), and -be’ follows -vIp. In the third word, the negated
notion is Kill (that is, not kill), so -be’ follows HoH.

46

Page 29:
VERBS
The suffix -be’ cannot be used with imperative verbs. For
imperatives, the following suffix is required.
-Qo’ don’t!, won’t
This negative suffix is used in imperatives and to denote
refusal.

ylja’Qo’ don’t tell him/her!
yl- (prefix) imperative: you-him/her
ja’ (verb) tell
-Qo’ (rover) don’t!

choja’Qo’chugh if you won't tell me, if you refuse to tell me

cho- (prefix)

ja’ (verb)
-Qo’ (rover)
-chugh (9)

you-—me
tell
won't

if

HIHoHvIpQo’ don’t be afraid to kill me!
HI- (prefix) imperative: you-me
HoH (verb) kill
-vIp (2) afraid
-Qo’ (rover) don’t!

Unlike -be’, the position of -Qo’ does not change: it occurs
last, unless followed by a Type 9 suffix. Nevertheless, it is
considered a rover because it is the imperative counterpart to
-be’.

-Ha’ undo

This negative suffix implies not merely that something is
not done (as does -be’), but that there is a change of state:
something that was previously done is now undone. For
convenience, it will here be translated as undo, but it is closer
to the English prefixes mis-, de-, dis- (as in misunderstand,
demystify, disentangle). It is also used if something is done
wrongly. Unlike -be’, -Ha’ can be used in imperatives.

chenHa’moHlaH it can destroy them
0 (prefix) it-them
chen (verb) take form

47

Page 30:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

-Ha’ (rover) undo
-moH (4) cause
-laH (5) can, able

This verb actually means something like it can cause them to
undo their form.

yIchu’Ha’ disengage it! (e.g., cloaking device)

yl- (prefix) imperative: you-it
chu’ (verb) engage, activate
-Ha’ (rover) undo
bIjatlhHa’chugh if you say the wrong thing
bI- (prefix) you
jatlh (verb) say
-Ha’ (rover) undo
-chugh (9) if

This shows how -Ha’ can be used in the sense of wrongly. The
word might be translated as if you misspeak. Using -be’ (that
is, bIjatlhbe’chugh) would mean if you don’t speak.

Do’Ha’ it is unfortunate

0 (prefix) it
-Do’ (verb) be lucky, fortunate
-Ha’ (rover) undo

The use of -Ha’ in this sentence suggests a turn of luck from
good to bad.

It is interesting that -Ha’ always occurs right after the verb.
It is not known why Klingon grammarians insist on calling it a
rover. It was felt best not to argue with Klingon tradition,
however, so -Ha’ is here classified as a rover.

-qu’ emphatic

This suffix emphasizes or affirms whatever immediately
precedes it.

yIHaghqu’ study him/her well

yl- (prefix) imperative: you-him/her
Hagh (verb) study
-qu’ (rover) emphatic

nuQaw’qu’be’ they have not finished us off
nu- (prefix) they-us

48

Page 31:
VERBS

Qaw’ (verb) destroy
-qu’ (rover) emphatic
-be’ (rover) not

The roving nature of -qu’ can be seen in the following set:

plHoHvIpbe’qu’ we are NOT afraid to kill you
pIHoHvIpqu’be’ we are not AFRAID to kill you
pIHoHqu’vIpbe’ we are not afraid to KILL you

pI- (prefix) we-you
HoH (verb) kill

-vip (2) afraid
-be’ (rover) not

-qu’ (rover) emphatic

The first word above might be used after an enemy chal-
lenged the bravery of the speaker. The second might be
followed by an explanation such as, ‘“We are not willing to kill
you because we require your services.” The third word would
be used to emphasize killing, as opposed to some other form
of punishment.

The rover -qu’ also follows verbs when they are used
adjectivally (section 4.4).

4.4 Adjectives

There are no adjectives as such in Klingon. Those notions
expressed as adjectives in English (such as big, tired) are
expressed by verbs in Klingon (be big, be tired). A verb
expressing a state or quality can be used immediately follow-
ing a noun to modify that noun.

puq Doy’ tired child
puq child
Doy’ be tired
Dujmey tIn big ships
Dujmey ships, vessels
tIn be big
The rover -qu’ emphatic (section 4.3) may follow verbs
functioning adjectivally. In this usage, it is usually translated
very.
Dujmey tInqu’ very big ships
49

Page 32:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

wanl’ ramqu’ a very unimportant event
wanl’ event, occurrence
ram be trivial, unimportant

If a Type 5 noun suffix is used (section 3.3.5), it follows the
verb, which, when used to modify the noun in this way, can
have no other suffix except the rover -qu’ emphatic. The Type
5 noun suffix follows -qu’.

veng tInDaq in the big city
veng city
tIn be big
-Daq locative

veng tInqu’Daq in the very big city

50

Page 33:
5. OTHER KINDS OF WORDS
OO

By far the bulk of Klingon words are nouns and verbs. There
are a few others which, probably as an expedient, Klingon
grammarians lump together in a group called chuvymey
leftovers. It is possible to classify the chuvmey some-
what.

5.1. Pronouns

In addition to possessive suffixes for nouns (section 3.3.4) and
pronominal prefixes for verbs (section 4.1), there is a set of
nine pronouns which are independent words.

jIH [, me maH we, us

soH you tihIH you (plural)
ghaH he/she, him/her chaH they, them
’oH it bIH they, them
*e’ that

net that

The pronoun chaH they is used when it refers to a group of
beings capable of using language; otherwise, bIH they is used.
The pronouns ’e’ and net are used only in special sentence
constructions (see section 6.2.5).

There is no grammatical gender in Klingon. Third-person

51

Page 34:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

singular pronouns can be translated he or she as context
dictates.

Pronouns may be used as nouns, but only for emphasis or
added clarity. They are not required. Thus, the following sets
of sentences are all grammatically correct.

yaS vilegh jIH I see the officers.
yaS vilegh

jiH mulegh yaS The officer sees me.
mulegh yaS

ghaH vilegh jIH I see himlher.
ghaH vilegh
vilegh jlH
vilegh
(yaS officer, vIlegh I see him/her, mulegh he/she sees me)

The final two sentences (vIlegh jIH, vIlegh) are in fact
ambiguous. They could equally well mean I see them. (The
verb prefix vI- is either /—him/her or I-them.) If context does
not make it clear which meaning is intended, pronouns can be
used:

ghaH vilegh / see him/her.
chaH vilegh I see them.

Pronouns are not used in possessive constructions in the
way nouns are; instead, the set of possessive noun suffixes is
used (section 3.3.4).

Finally, pronouns can be used as verbs, in the sense of “I

m,” etc. (See section 6.3).

5.2. Numbers

Klingon originally had a ternary number system; that is, one
based on three. Counting proceeded as follows: 1, 2, 3;3+1,
342, 3+3; 2X3+1, 2X3+2, 2x3+3; 3x3+1, 3x3+2,
3x3+3; and then it got complicated. In accordance with
the more accepted practice, the Klingon Empire sometime
back adopted a decimal number system, one based on ten.

52

Page 35:
OTHER KINDS OF WORDS

Though no one knows for sure, it is likely that this change
was made more out of concern for understanding the scien-
tific data of other civilizations than out of a spirit of cooper-
ation.

The Klingon numbers are:

1 wa’ 6 jav

2 cha’ 7 Soch

3 wej 8 chorgh
4 loS 9 Hut

5 vagh 10 wa’maH

Higher numbers are formed by adding special number-
forming elements to the basic set of numbers (1-9). Thus,
wa’maH ten consists of wa’ one plus the number-forming
element for ten, maH. Counting continues as follows:

11 wa’maH wa’ (that is, ten and one)
12 wa’maH cha’ (that is, ten and two)
etc.

Higher numbers are based on maH ten, vatlh hundred, and
SaD or SanID thousand. Both SaD and SanID are equally
correct for thousand, and both are used with roughly equal
frequency. It is not known why this number alone has two
variants.

20 cha’maH (that is, two tens)

30 wejmaH (that is, three tens)
etc.

100 wa’ vatlh (that is, one hundred)
200 cha’ vatlh (that is, two hundreds)
etc.

1,000 wa’SaD or wa’SanID (that is, one thousand)

2,000 cha’SaD or cha’SanID (that is, two thousands)
etc.

Numbers are combined as in English:

5,347 vaghSad wejvatlh loSmaH Soch or
53

Page 36:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

vaghSanID wejvatlh loSmaH Soch
604 javvatih loS
31 wejmaH wa’

Some of the number-forming elements for higher numbers
are:

ten thousand netlh
hundred thousand bIp
million uy’

Zero is pagh.

Numbers are used as nouns. As such, they may stand alone
as subjects or objects or they may modify another noun.

mulegh cha’ Two (of them) see me.
(mulegh they see me, cha’ two)

wa’ yIHoH Kill one (of them)!
(wa’ one, yIHoH kill him/her!)

The preceding sentence is grammatically correct even without
the wa’ because the prefix yI- indicates a singular object. The
wa’, therefore, is used for emphasis only.

Numbers used as modifiers precede the noun they modify.

loS puqpu’ or loS puq four children
vaghmaH yuQmey or vaghmaH yuQ fifty planets

The plural suffixes (-pu’, -mey) are not necessary when a
number is used.

When a number is used for numbering, as opposed to
counting, it follows the noun. Compare:

DuS wa’ torpedo tube number I
wa’ DuS one torpedo tube

Ordinal numbers (first, second, etc.) are formed by adding
-DIch to the numbers.

wa’DIch first
cha’DIch second
HutDIch ninth

Ordinal numbers follow the noun.
meb cha’DIch second guest
54

Page 37:
OTHER KINDS OF WORDS
Adding -logh to a number gives the notion of repetitions.

wa’logh once
cha’logh twice
Hutlogh nine times

These numbers function in the sentence as adverbials (section
5.4).
5.3. Conjunctions

Conjunctions are of two types: those that join nouns together
and those that join sentences together. The meanings of the
two types of conjunctions, however, are the same:

JOINING NOUNS JOINING SENTENCES
je ej and
joq qoj and/or
ghap pagh either/or

The conjunctions joining nouns come after the final noun.
DeS ’uS je an arm and a leg
DeS ’uS joq an arm ora leg or both
DeS ’uS ghap either an arm or a leg (but not both)

The noun conjunction je has an additional function: when it
follows a verb, it means also, too.

qaleghpu’ je I also saw you, I saw you too

As in English, the meaning of such sentences is ambiguous:
I and others saw you or I saw you and others. The exact
meaning is determined by context.

In addition to the three listed above, there is one other
sentence conjunction:

’ach but, nevertheless, however, even so

This word is sometimes shortened to ’a.
The conjunctions joining sentences occur between the
sentences they join. For illustrations, see section 6.2.1.

5.4. Adverbials

These words usually come at the beginning of a sentence and
describe the manner of the activity.

55

Page 38:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

batlh with honor, in an honored fashion
bong by accident, accidentally, not intentionally
chaq perhaps

chIch on purpose, purposely

DaH now

Do’ with luck, luckily

1oQ slightly, a little bit

nom fast, quickly

not never

pay’ suddenly

plj often

Qlt slowly

reH always

rut sometimes

tugh soon

vaj thus, in that case, so, accordingly, then
wej not yet

Examples:

bong yaS vIHoHpuw’ / accidentally killed the officer.
(yaS officer, vViHoHpu’ I killed
him/her)
batlh Daqawlu’taH You will be remembered with honor.
(Daqawlu’taH somebody continues to
remember you)
vaj Daleghpu’ Then you have seen it.
(Daleghpu’ you have seen it)
wej vilegh I don’t see him/her yet
(vIlegh I see him/her)

One word fits somewhat awkwardly into this category:

neH only, merely, just

Unlike the other adverbials, it follows the verb which it
modifies. The semantic effect is one of trivializing the action.

qama’ vIiqIppu’ neH J merely hit the prisoner.
(gama’ prisoner, vIqIppu’ I hit him/
her,
Duj yIQotlh neH Just disable the ship!
(Duj ship, vessel, yIQotlh disable it!)

56

Page 39:
OTHER KINDS OF WORDS

The use of neH in the preceding sentence implies that the ship
is to be disabled, but not damaged further.

Also unlike the other adverbials, neH can follow a noun. In
such cases, it means only, alone.

yaS neH only the officer, the officer alone
jonta’ neH only the engine

Adverbials sometimes occur alone, functioning more or
less as exclamations (section 5.5). For example:

nom Move fast! Move quickly!
wej Don’t do it yet!
tugh Hurry up!

5.5 Exclamations
These expressions stand as sentences in their own right.

ghobe’ No. (response to a question)

Ha’ Let’s go! Come on!

Hlja’ or HISlaH Yes. (response to a question)
lw’ or luq Yes. Okay. I will.

maj Good. (expressing satisfaction)
majQa’ Very good. Well done.

nuqneH What do you want? (greeting)
pltlh Done!

Qo’ No. I won't. I refuse.

SuH or Su’ Ready!

toH Well! So!

wejpuH Charming. (used only ironically)
’eH Ready!

HIja’ and HISlaH yes seem to be used interchangeably.

SuH, Su’, and ’eH all mean that the speaker is about to give
a command. They are comparable to the “Ready!”’ at the
beginning of a race: ‘“‘Ready! Set! Go!” SuH and Su’, but not
’eH, can also be used to indicate that the speaker is ready to
do something or that arrangements have been made for
something to happen. Some speakers of Klingon pronounce
SuH as if it were SSS, almost like the English expression for
“be quiet”: shhh!

pitih is used for It’s done! I’ve done it! I’ve finished! All
done! etc.

57

Page 40:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

The expression toH is roughly equivalent to English aha!
Also included in the category of exclamations are Klingon
curses. Only three such curses have been noted to date.

QV’yaH *?/#@
ghuy’cha’ *@3$%
Qu’vathh #*@/

5.6. Names and address

Klingon names are frequently mispronounced by non-
Klingons. Furthermore, when written in the writing systems
of other languages, they usually end up with spellings which
only suggest their true pronunciation. For example, the
Klingon sound tlh at the beginning of a word is almost always
written kl by English speakers, presumably because the sound
tl cannot occur at the beginning of an English word. Similarly,
Klingon Q is often rendered kr, and Klingon q always comes
out k.

The following is a list of a few Klingon names along with
their usual English spellings.

mara Mara
matih Maltz
qeng Kang
qeylIS Kahless
golotih Koloth
qor Kor
qoreQ Korax
QaS Kras
Qel Krell
Qugh Kruge
torgh Torg
valQIS Valkris

Names may be used in direct address (that is, calling
somebody by name) at the beginning or end of the sentence.
Other words in direct address (such as qaH sir, joHwl’ my
lord) are used similarly.

torgh HIghoS Torg, come here! (HIghoS pro-
ceed toward me!)
lu’ qaH Yes, sir!

58

Page 41:
6. SYNTAX
ee

As in any language, Klingon sentences range from the very
simple and straightforward to the very complex and convo-
luted. What follows here are the mere basics of Klingon
sentence structure. This information should provide a good
foundation so that students of Klingon can converse properly,
though not eloquently, while learning more about the lan-
guage.

6.1. Basic sentences

The basic structure of a Klingon sentence is:
OBJECT-VERB-SUBJECT

This is the reverse of the order in English, so care should be
taken to avoid interpreting sentences backward. The subject
is the person or thing doing the action described by the verb;
the object is the recipient of that action.

The importance of word order can be seen by comparing
the following sentences.

puq legh yaS The officer sees the child.
yaS legh puq The child sees the officer.

In both sentences, the words are identical: puq child, legh
59

Page 42:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

he/she sees him/her, yaS officer. The only way to know who is
seeing whom is by the order of the words in the sentence. The
verb legh is preceded by the prefix 0 he/she—him/her.

When the subject and/or object is first or second person,
the prefix on the verb must be the proper one.

puq vilegh jIH J see the child.
(vIlegh I see him/her)
jIH mulegh puq The child sees me.
(mulegh he/she sees me)

Actually, the first- and second-nerson pronouns are seldom
used in sentences of this type (though they can, as here, be
used for emphasis), so the following sentences illustrate more
commonly occurring sentence types.

pug vilegh I see the child.
mulegh puq The child sees me.

Imperative sentences (commands) follow the same rules.

So’wI’ yIchu’ Engage the cloaking device!
(So’wI’ cloaking device,
ylchu’ engage it!)
DoS yIbuS Concentrate on the target!
(DoS target, yIbuS concentrate on it!)
yaSpu’ tlHoH Kill the officers!
(yaSpuw’ officers, tI1HoH kill them!)

Any noun in the sentence indicating something other than
subject or object comes first, before the object noun. Such
nouns usually end in a Type 5 noun suffix (section 3.3.5).

pa’Daq yaS vileghpu’ J saw the officer in the room.
(pa’Daq in the room,
yaS officer, vileghpu’ J saw him/
her)

Other examples of this construction are given in section
3.3.5.
6.2. Complex sentences

A few of the more common types of more elaborate Klingon
sentences will be illustrated.

60

Page 43:
SYNTAX
6.2.1. Compound sentences

Two sentences may be joined together to form a longer
compound sentence. Both sentences must be able to stand
alone as properly formed sentences. When combined, they
simply come one after the other, joined by a conjunction (see
section 5.3).

jlSoptaH ’ej QongtaH J am eating, and he/she is
sleeping.
jlSoptaH ’ach QongtaH I am eating, but he/she is
sleeping.

bISoptaH qoj bItlhutlhtaH You are eating and/or
you are drinking.
bISoptaH pagh bitlhutlhtaH You are either eating or else
you are drinking.

When the subject of both of the joined sentences is
the same, the English translation may be reduced to a less
choppy form, but Klingon does not allow this shortening.
The pronominal prefix must be used with both verbs.
Thus, the final two sentences above may be translated
You are eating and/or drinking; You are either eating or
drinking.

When a noun (as opposed to simply a verbal prefix)
indicates subject and/or object, there are some options in
Klingon. In its fullest form, a Klingon sentence repeats the
noun:

yaS legh pug ’ej yaS qIp puq
(yaS officer, puq child, legh he/she sees
him/her, qIp he/she hits him/her)
The child sees the officer and the child hits
the officer.

or
The child sees the officer and hits the officer.

or
The child sees and hits the officer.

It is possible, however, to use pronouns rather than nouns in
the second of the joined sentences.

61

Page 44:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

yaS legh puq ’ej ghaH qIp ghaH (ghaH he/she)
The child sees the officer and he/she hits him/her.
or
The child sees the officer and hits him/her.

If the context is clear, even the pronoun may be left out.

yaS vilegh ’ej viqIp (vI- [-him/her)
I see the officer and I hit him/her.

or

I see the officer and hit him/her.
or

I see and hit the officer.

6.2.2. Subordinate clauses

Klingon verbs ending in Type 9 suffixes (other than -’a’
interrogative and -wl’ one who does, one which does) always
occur in sentences with another verb. Hence, they are verbs
in subordinate clauses.

cha yIbaH qara’DI’
or qara’DI’ cha yIbaH Fire the torpedoes at my com-
mand!

The two parts of this sentence are cha ylIbaH fire the
torpedoes! and qara’DI’ when I command you or as soon as I
command you. -DI’ is a Type 9 suffix meaning as soon as,
when, so qara’DI’ must occur as part of a larger sentence.
Note that the order of the two parts of the sentence is
variable.

A few further examples should make the use of subordinate
clauses clear.

bljatlhHa’chugh qaHoH
or qaHoH bljatlhHa’chugh If you say the wrong thing,
I will kill you.
(bijatIhHa’chugh if you
misspeak, qaHoH I kill
you)

Note that although the English translation uses the word will,
there is no marker for future in Klingon. The unsuffixed verb
HoH kill is neutral as to time: since the person being

62

Page 45:
SYNTAX

addressed is being given a chance to speak, that person must
still be alive. Thus, the killing must take place in the future.

SutlhtaHvIS chaH DIHIvpu’

or DIHIvpu’ SutlhtaHvIS chaH While they were
negotiating we
attacked them.
(SutihtaHvIS while
they are negotiating,
chaH they, DIHIvpu’
we attacked them)

The notion of were negotiating, rather than are negotiating,
comes from the suffix -pu’ perfective attached to the verb HIv
attack. A translation such as While they are negotiating we
attacked them makes little sense in English and misrepresents
the meaning of the Klingon sentence.

6.2.3. Relative clauses

Relative clauses are translated into English as phrases begin-
ning with who, which, where, and, most commonly, that. Like
adjectives, they describe nouns: the dog which is running, the
cat that is sleeping, the child who is playing, the restaurant
where we ate. The noun modified by a relative clause is the
head noun.

In Klingon, the verb in the relative clause ends with the
Type 9 suffix -bogh, which will, for convenience, be translated
which.

Whether the head noun follows or precedes the relative
clause depends on its relationship to that clause. Compare the
following:

qIppu’bogh yaS officer who hit him/her
yaS qIppu’bogh officer whom he/she hit

In both phrases, the relative clause is qIppu’bogh (qIp hit,
-pu’ perfective, -bogh which), and the head noun is yaS
officer. In the first phrase, yaS is the subject of the verb qIp
(the officer is doing the hitting), so it follows qIppu’bogh, just
as all subjects follow the verb. In the second phrase, yaS is the

63

Page 46:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

object (the officer is getting hit), so it precedes qIppu’bogh,
just as all objects precede the verb.

The whole construction (relative clause plus head noun), as
a unit, is used in a sentence as a noun. Accordingly, this
construction follows or precedes the verb of the sentence,
depending on whether it is the subject or object.

qIppu’bogh yaS vilegh I see the officer who hit
himlher.

The entire relative construction qIppu’bogh yaS officer who
hit him/her is the object of the verb vIlegh I see him/her, so it
precedes the verb.

mulegh qIppu’bogh yaS The officer who hit him/her
sees me.

Here, qIppu’bogh yaS is the subject of the verb mulegh he/she
sees me, so it follows the verb.

This pattern is also followed when the head noun is the
object of the verb in the relative clause, such as yaS
qIppu’bogh officer whom he/she hit.

yaS qIppu’bogh vilegh I see the officer whom he/she
hit.
mulegh yaS qIppu’bogh The officer whom he/she hit
sees me.

In the English translation, the relative pronouns (that,
which, etc.) may often be omitted: I see the officer he/she hit,
the officer he/she hit sees me. In Klingon, however, -bogh is
mandatory.

6.2.4. Purpose clauses

If an action is being done in order to accomplish something,
or for the purpose of accomplishing something, the verb
describing what is to be accomplished ends with the Type 9
suffix -meH, which may be translated for, for the purpose of,
in order to. The purpose clause always precedes the noun or
verb whose purpose it is describing.

ja’chuqmeH rojHom neH jaghla’ The enemy commander
wishes a truce (in order)
to confer.

64

Page 47:
SYNTAX

The phrase ja’chuqmeH rojHom a truce (in order) to confer is
the object of the verb neH he/she wants it; the subject is
jaghla’ enemy commander. The object is a noun rojHom truce
preceded by the purpose clause ja’chuqmeH for the purpose
of conferring or in order to confer. (The verb is made up of ja’
tell, -chuq each other; thus, confer is tell each other.)

jagh luHoHmeH jagh lunejtaH They are searching for
the enemy in order to
kill him/her.

Here the purpose clause is jagh luHoHmeH in order for them
to kill the enemy, which is made up of the object noun jagh
enemy preceding the verb HoHmeH in order for them to kill
him/her (lu- they-him/her, HoH kill, -meH for). It describes
the purpose of the verb lunejtaH they are searching for
him/her (lu- they—him/her, nej seek, search for, -taH continu-
ous). Note that, just as in compound sentences, the object
noun jagh enemy occurs before each verb for which it is the
object. Thus, somewhat more literally, the sentence may be
translated In order to kill the enemy, they are searching for the
enemy.

Furthermore, just as in compound sentences, the second of
two identical nouns may be replaced by a pronoun or, if the
context is clear, left out altogether.

jagh luHoHmeH ghaH lunejtaH

jagh luHoHmeH lunejtaH They are searching for the
enemy in order to kill
himlher.

6.2.5. Sentences as objects

Klingon has two special pronouns, ’e’ and net, which refer to
the previous sentence as a whole. They are used primarily,
though not exclusively, with verbs of thinking or observation
(such as know, see). They are always treated as the object
of the verb, and the verb always takes a prefix indicating
a third-person singular object. What is a single sentence
in English is often two sentences in Klingon. net is used
only under special circumstances (see page 66), but ’e’ is
common. Several examples should make the use of ’e’
clear.

65

Page 48:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY
qama’pu’ DIHoH ’e’ luSov They know we kill prisoners.

This sentence is actually two: (1) qama’pu’ DIHoH We kill
prisoners (qama’puw’ prisoners, DIHoH we kill them); (2) ’e’
luSov They know that (’e’ that, luSov they know it). The
pronoun ’e’ refers to the previous sentence, We kill prisoners.

yaS qIppu’ ’e’ vilegh I saw him/her hit the officers.

The two sentences here are: (1) yaS qIppu’ He/she hit the
officer; (2) ’e? vilegh I see that (vMlegh I see it). The construc-
tion might equally well be translated as I saw that he/she hit
the officer. Note that the verb in the second sentence, vIlegh J
see it, is neutral as to time. The past tense of the translation
(I saw .. . ) comes from the verb in the first sentence, qIppu’
he/she hit him/her (-pu’ perfective). In complex sentences of
this type, the second verb never takes an aspect suffix (section
4.2.7).

When the verb of the second sentence has a third-person
subject (that is, the pronominal prefix is 0) but the intended
meaning is one or someone, rather than he, she, it, or they, net
is used instead of ’e’.

qama’pu’ DIHoH net Sov One knows we kill prisoners.

As above, the first sentence here is qama’pu’ DIHoH We kill
prisoners. The second sentence is net Sov One knows that.
The full construction implies that it is common knowledge
that the group to which the speaker belongs kills prisoners.

Qu’vaD II’ net tu’bej One certainly finds it useful for
the mission.

The first part of this example is Qu’vaD II’ It is useful for the
mission (Qu’vaD for the mission, WW it is useful). The second
part is net tu’bej One certainly finds that or One certainly
observes that. The full construction might also be translated
One will certainly observe that it is useful to the mission. Note
that although the word will makes a more flowing translation,
there is nothing in the Klingon sentence indicating future
tense.

When the verb of the second sentence is neH want, neither
66

Page 49:
SYNTAX

%e’ nor net is used, but the construction is otherwise identical
to that just described.

jlQong vIneH I want to sleep.
(jIQong I sleep, vIneH I want it)

qalegh vIneH / want to see you.
(qalegh J see you, vIneH I want it)

Dalegh vIneH I want you to see him/her.
(Dalegh you see him/her, vIneH I want it)

qama’pu’ vijonta’ vIneH J wanted to capture prisoners.

In this final example, the first part is qama’pu’ vIjonta’
captured prisoners (qama’pw’ prisoners, vIjonta’ I captured
them). Note once again that the aspect marker (in this case,
-ta’ accomplished) goes with the first verb only; the second
verb, vIneH J want it, is neutral as to time. The past tense of
the translation (I wanted . . .) comes from the aspect marker
on the first verb.

Similarly, with verbs of saying (say, tell, ask, etc.), ’e’ and
net are not used. The two phrases simply follow one another,
in either order.

qaja’ pu’ HiqaghQo’
or HIgaghQo’ qaja’pu’ J told you not to interrupt me.
This is literally I told you, “Don’t interrupt me!” or “Don’t
interrupt me” I told you (qaja’pu’ I told you, HIqaghQo’ don’t
interrupt me!). An aspect marker (here, -pu’ perfective) may
always be attached to the verb of saying, regardless of
whether it is the first or second verb.

Finally, the use of rIntaH to indicate that an action is
accomplished (section 4.2.7) is another example of the two-
verb (or two-sentence) construction.

6.3. “To be”

There is no verb corresponding to English to be in Klingon.
On the other hand, all pronouns (section 5.1) can be used as
verbs, in the sense of J am, you are, etc.

tlhIngan jIH / am a Klingon.
67

Page 50:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

yaS SoH You are an officer.
puqpu’ chaH They are children.

The pronoun always follows the noun.

Similarly, there is no verb corresponding to to be in the
sense of ‘‘to be at a place.” Again, the pronouns are used,
followed, where appropriate, by verbal suffixes.

pa’wljDaq jIHtaH J am in my quarters.
(pa’wljDaq in my room, jIH I,
-taH continuous)

In the above examples, the subjects are pronouns. If the
subject is a noun, it follows the third-person pronoun (ghaH
he/she, ’oH it, chaH they, bIH they) and takes the -’e’ topic
suffix (see section 3.3.5).

puqpu’ chaH qama’pw’ ’e’ The prisoners are children.
pa’DajDaq ghaHtaH la’’e’ The commander is in his
quarters.

These sentences might also be translated As for the prisoners,
they are children; As for the commander, he is in his quarters.

6.4. Questions

There are two types of questions: those which may be
answered “yes” or ‘“‘no,” and those which require explana-
tions as answers.
Yes/no questions are formed with the Type 9 suffix -’a’
added to the verb. Examples are given in section 4.2.9.
Appropriate answers to yes/no questions are:

HIja’ or HISlaH yes
ghobe’ no

The other type of question contains a question word:

chay’ how?

ghorgh when?
nuq what?
nuqDaq where?

68

Page 51:
SYNTAX

qatlh why?
’ar how many? how much?
*Iv who?

For ’Iv who? and nuq what? the question word fits into the
sentence in the position that would be occupied by the
answer. For example:

yaS legh ’Iv Who sees the officer?
*Iv legh yaS Whom does the officer see?

In the first question, it is the subject which is being asked
about, so Iv who? goes in the subject position, following the
verb legh he/she sees him/her. In the second case, the object is
being questioned, so the question word goes in the object
position, before the verb.

Similarly with nuq what?:

Duj ghoStaH nuq What is coming toward the ship?
(Duj ship, vessel, ghoStaH it is
proceeding toward it)

nuq legh yaS What does the officer see?

Both ’Iv and nuq are treated as nouns as far as the
pronominal prefixes are concerned. That is, they are consid-
ered third person.

nughoStaH nuq What is coming toward us? (nughoStaH it
is proceeding toward us)
nuq Dalegh What do you see? (Dalegh you see it)

The word for where?, nuqDagq, is actually nuq what?
followed by the suffix -Daq Jocative (see section 3.3.5). As
would any locative phrase (see section 6.1), it comes at the
beginning of the sentence.

nuqDaq So’taH yaS Where is the officer hiding?
(So’taH he/she is hiding)

Three other question words likewise occur at the beginning
of the sentence.

69

Page 52:
THE KLINGON DICTIONARY

ghorgh Haw’ pw’ yaS When did the officer flee?
(Haw’ pu’ he/she has fled)

qatlh Haw’pu’ yaS Why did the officer flee?

chay’ Haw’pu’ yaS How did the officer flee?

Note also:
chay’ jura’ What are your orders?

This is actually chay’ how?, jura’ you command us; thus,
How do you command us?

The question word chay’ how? may be used as a one-word
sentence meaning How did this happen? What happened?
What the—?

Finally, ’ar how many? how much? follows the noun to
which it refers. It can never follow a noun with a plural suffix
(-pu’, -mey, -Du’; see section 3.3.2).

Haw’pu’ yaS ’ar How many officers fled?
(Haw’ pu’ they fied, yaS officer)
nin ’ar wighaj How much fuel do we have?
(nIn fuel, wighaj we have it)

6.5. Commands

Commands are given with appropriate imperative prefixes.
See sections 4.1.2, 4.3.

6.6. Comparatives and superlatives

The idea of something being more or greater than something
else (comparative) is expressed by means of a construction
which can be represented by the following formula:

A Q law’ B Q puS

In this formula, A and B are the two things being compared
and Q is the quality which is being measured. The two
Klingon words in the formula are law’ be many and puS be
few. Thus, it says A’s Q is many, B’s Q is few or A has more Q
than B has or A is Q-er than B.

Any verb expressing a quality or condition may fit into the
Q slot.

70

Page 53:
SYNTAX
la’ jaq law’ yaS jaq puS The commander is bolder than
the officer.
(la’ commander, jaq be bold, yaS
officer)
To express the superlative, that something is the most or
the greatest of all, the noun Hoch all is used in the B position:

la’ jaq law’ Hoch jaq puS The commander is boldest
of all.

In comparative and superlative constructions, the verb of
quality (jaq be bold in the sentences above) must be said
twice.

71

